# IPC

This is the inter-process communication infrastructure for this project, aimed to abstract message sending, receiving, and routing between processes and even within the same process.

## Architecture

### Port

A port is a very simple abstraction on a message channel. A common message channel provides a `postMessage` method and a `message` event. The `Port` interface further abstracts them into 2 methods:

- `send` to post a message through the port to the destination.
- `listen` to receive a message and trigger the specified callback.

This package provides 2 built-in implementations of the `Port` interface:

- `DirectPort` simulates a message channel inside a single process. It triggers all callbacks registered via `listen` methods **asynchronously** when the `send` method is called.
- `ProcessPort` may be the more widely used one. It wraps a `ChildProcess` object to a `Port` implementation. The wrapped process must be a `node` process and must [have `ipc` enabled on its `stdio`](https://nodejs.org/api/child_process.html#optionsstdio). Usually, an object from the `fork` method of the `child_process` module satisfies this requirement.

### Execution

`Execution` may be the most underlying element of IPC architecture. Since we want IPC to work like simple function calls, it plays an important role in managing a series of messages and composing them into an `AsyncIterable` object.

You cannot directly use `Execution` objects. It is exposed from the `ExecutionManager` class, which manages all executions by a string key.

With a `ExecutionManager` instance, you can start an execution, put chunks into it, or transition it into an errored or completed state.

```ts
const manager = new ExecutionManager();
const execution = manager.start('key');

// Put chunk data
execution.put(1);
execution.put(2);
execution.put(3);

// Mark as complete
execution.complete();
```

A returned `Execution` object behaves like an `AsyncIterable`. Use `for await ... of` to consume the data:

```ts
// Logs 1, 2, 3
for await (const data of execution) {
    console.log(data);
}
```

### Client

After a port establishes a message channel, we now have 2 sides: one to initiate a function call and one to handle and respond to this call.

A `Client` object is used to initiate function calls. Here we will have a `Protocol` interface generated by server component, this interface defines the `action` and `payload` relationship to indicate the invocation target, **by using a `Protocol` interface you will not able to pass incorrect types to a certain `action`**. It also requires a `taskId` to identify the task to which this call belongs.

```ts
import {Protocol} from './server';

const client = new Client<Protocol>(port);
const result = await client.call('someTaskId', 'greeting', {name: 'user'});
console.log(result); // 'Hello user'
```

You can also use `callStreaming` to get an `AsyncIterable` object to consume the response data:

```ts
const client = new Client(port);
for await (const message of client.callStreaming('someTaskId', 'greeting', {names: ['user', 'admin']})) {
    // Hello user
    // Hello admin
    console.log(message);
}
```

Errors thrown from the server side are caught on the client side. Everything works just like a simple function.

### Request Handler

On the implementation side, we define a `RequestHandler` object to handle a specific action. You provide the implementation by extending the `RequestHandler` class and:

1. Define a static `action` property as const.
2. Implement the `handleRequest` method.

Be aware that the `handleRequest` method is a generator function. You can yield data but **don't use `return` statement**.

```ts
class GreetingRequestHandler extends RequestHandler {
    static action = 'greeting' as const;

    async *handleRequest(payload: {name: string}) {
        yield `Hello ${payload.name}`;
    }
}
```

Thrown errors from the `handleRequest` method will be automatically caught and sent back to the client side, resulting in an exception in `Client` calls.

When you want to send some messages back to the client without influencing the function progress, such as doing some logging, the `notify` method is for you.

```ts
class GreetingRequestHandler extends RequestHandler {
    static action = 'greeting' as const;

    async *handleRequest(payload: {name: string}) {
        this.notify('log', {level: 'verbose', message: `Received greeting from ${payload.name}`});
        yield `Hello ${payload.name}`;
    }
}
```

### Server

With a `Server` object connected to a port, all incoming messages are listened to and dispatched to registered `RequestHandler` classes based on their `action` static property.

Usually, we create a server by subclassing the `Server` base class, implementing the `initializeHandlers` method, and using `registerHandler` to associate an action with a handler class.

```ts
class CalculatorServer extends Server {
    initializeHandlers() {
        this.registerHandler(AddRequestHandler);
        this.registerHandler(SubtractRequestHandler);
        this.registerHandler(MultiplyRequestHandler);
        this.registerHandler(DivideRequestHandler);
    }
}
```

This `initializeHandlers` method registers 4 different request handlers, using their `action` static property like `"add"`, `"subtract"`, etc...

We can also generate a `Protocol` interface from all request handlers using the `ProtocolOf` generic type:

```ts
export type Protocol = ProtocolOf<
    | typeof AddRequestHandler
    | typeof SubtractRequestHandler
    | typeof MultiplyRequestHandler
    | typeof DivideRequestHandler
>;
```

This results an interface like:

```ts
interface Protocol {
    add: (x: number) => AsyncIterable<number>;
    subtract: (x: number) => AsyncIterable<number>;
    multiply: (x: number) => AsyncIterable<number>;
    divide: (x: number) => AsyncIterable<number>;
}
```

This interface can be used as the type of a `Client` instance, so a client instance knows each method's type and will have a good TypeScript experience.

After a server is created, connect it to a port using the `connect` method, and it will start listening to messages.

```ts
const server = new CalculatorServer();
await server.connect(port);
```
